# 19-202-0402 MICROPROCESSORS
## Course Outcomes:

1. Describe the architecture & organization of 8085 & 8086 Microprocessor.
2. Understand and classify the instruction set of 8085/8086 microprocessor and distinguish the
use of different instructions and apply it in assembly language programming.
3. Relate the addressing modes used in the instructions.
4. Realize the Interfacing of memory & various I/O devices with 8085/8086 microprocessor.
5. Familiarise the architecture and operation of Programmable Interface Devices and realize the
programming & interfacing of it with 8085 microprocessor.
6. Interface various pheripheral IC’s with Intel 8085/8086 microprocessor for its various
applications.

## Module I
- Introduction to 8 bit microprocessor.
- Internal architecture of Intel 8085 microprocessor.
- Block diagram, Registers
- Internal Bus Organization.
- Functional details of pins,
- Control signals.
- External Address.
- Data bus multiplexing, Demultiplexing.
## Module II
- 8085 instruction set: 
- Instructions.
- Classifications.
- Addressing modes.
- Programming examples.
- Instruction Timing.
- I/ O mapped I/ O.zs
- memory mapped I/ O techniques.
- Interrupts of the 8085 Microprocessor.
## Module III
- Introduction to 8086.
- 8086 Architecture 
- Addressing Modes 
- Instruction Set and Programming,
- Assembler Directives.
- 8086 hardware design: 
    - minimum mode and maximum mode configurations,
    - Bus structure,
    - bus buffering,
    - latching,
    - system bus timing with diagram,
- Interrupt of 8086
Microprocessor.
## Module IV
- I/O and memory interfacing using 8085 and 8086:
- Memory interfacing and I/O interfacing with 8085 and 8086
- Parallel communication interface (8255)
- Timer (8253 / 8254).
- Keyboard / Display controller (8279).
- Interrupt controller (8259).
- DMA controller (8257).

### References:
1. Ramesh S. Gaonkar , Microprocessor 6th Edition 2013.

2. Nilesh B. Bahadure, Microprocessors 

3. Douglas V. Hall,Microprocessors and Interfacing,2nd Edition, 2012.

4. Yu-Cheng Liu, Glenn A. Gibson, Microcomputer Systems: The 8086/8088 Family

5. Kenneth Ayala, The 8086 Microprocessor: programming and interfacing the PC

6. Barry B. Brey, The INTEL Microprocessors 8th Edition.
