# 19-202-0403 COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE AND ORGANIZATION
### Course Outcomes:
On completion of this course the student will be able to:
1. Acquire knowledge about structure, functions and characteristics of computer systems.
2. Identify the addressing modes used in instructions.
3. Determine the set of control signals generated and their timing sequence, given an instruction.
4. Demonstrate how addition, multiplication and division operations are implemented inside a
computer system.
5. Explain each level of memory hierarchy.
6. Show how cache mapping affect the location of the data and the replacement policies.
7. Map a virtual address to physical address.
8. Identify and compare different methods for computer I/O.

## Module I - Basic structure of computers
- Functional units – Basic operational concepts – Historical Perspective.
- Instruction set architecture- Memory locations and addresses
- Instructions & instruction sequencing -
- Addressing modes – Assembly language.
- Basic Input Output operations - Stacks.
- Subroutines- RISC
and CISC styles.
## Module II - Processing Unit 
- Some fundamental concepts – Instruction Execution - Hardware components-
Register file, ALU, Data path-Instruction fetch and execution steps-control signals-Hardwired control
. CISC style processors-Interconnect using buses, microprogrammed control.
Computer arithmetic - design of fast adders -multiplication of unsigned numbers-multiplication of
signed numbers - Booth’s algorithm - Fast multiplication - bit pair recoding of multipliers, carry save
addition of summands-integer division - floating point numbers and operations.
## Module III - Memory organization 
- Semiconductor RAM memories - internal organization of memory chips -
Static and Dynamic memories - cache memories - mapping functions - replacement algorithms -
performance considerations- virtual memory - address translations - Secondary storage.
## Module IV - Input-output organization 
- Accessing I/O devices-program controlled I/O-interrupts – Enabling &
Disabling interrupts - handling multiple devices - device identification - vectored interrupts - interrupt
nesting – Simultaneous requests.
Bus structures–Synchronous and asynchronous - Arbitration - I/O interface circuits – parallel and
serial interfaces-Interconnection standards.
## References:
1. Carl Hamacher, Naraig Manjikian - Computer
Organization and Embedded Systems ,6th Edition.
2. Pal Chaudhury, P., Computer Organization and Design, 3rd Edition, 2009.
3. John P. Hayes, Computer Organization and Architecture, 4th Edition, 2003
4. Kai Hwang & Faye A. Briggs, Computer Architecture and Parallel Processing
5. David A. Patterson and John L. Hennessy, Computer Organization and Design, The
Hardware / Software Interface, 5th Edition
