19-202-0405 DATA STRUCTURES AND ALGORITHMS
Course Outcomes:
On completion of this course the student will be able to:
1. Explain the important features of data structures like arrays, linked lists, trees and graphs.
2. Define advanced data structures such as balanced search trees, hash tables, spatial data
structures etc.
3. Create the different data structures to solve a problem.
4. Describe and compare the performance of various sorting algorithms like quicksort,
mergesort and heapsort.
5. Describe algorithms on trees and graphs such as traversals, shortest path and minimum
spanning tree.
6. Design a data structure and algorithm for maximum efficiency.
Module I
Introduction to Data structures - Arrays & sparse matrices - representation, Searching - linear, binary –
Sorting – selection, bubble, insertion, quick, merge, heap - Hash tables – Hashing functions
-Associative arrays.
Module II
Linked lists – singly, doubly and circular lists, Application of linked lists – Polynomial manipulation,
stacks – Implementation of stacks using arrays and lists – Typical problems – Conversion of infix to
postfix – Evaluation of postfix expression . Queues and Deques – implementation., priority queues.
Module III
Trees, Definition and mathematical properties. Representation – sequential, lists - Binary trees –
Binary tree traversals – pre-order, in-order & post-order, Expression trees. Threaded binary trees.
Binary Search trees. AVL trees-tries-Spatial data structures- k-d tree.
Module IV
Graphs – Graph representation using adjacency matrices and lists – Graph traversals – DFS, BFS
-shortest path – Dijkstra’s algorithm, Minimum spanning tree – Kruskal Algorithm, Prims algorithm –
Tree based indexing, B trees and B+ trees.
References:
1. Robert Lafore, Data structures and algorithms in JAVA, 2nd Edition, Pearson, ISBN: 978-
8131718124.
2. Adam Drozdek, Data Structures and Algorithms in Java, Thomson Publications, 2nd Edition ,
ISBN-13: 9780534492526.
3. Aaron M. Tanenbaum, Moshe J. Augenstein, Yedidyah Langsam, Data Structures using Java,
Pearson Education, 2003, ISBN 13: 9780130477217.
4. Ellis Horowitz, SartajSahni, Dinesh P. Mehta, Fundamentals of Data Structures in C++,
Silicon Press, 2007.
5. Jean Paul Tremblay and Paul G Sorenson, An introduction to Data Structures with
Applications,McGraw-Hill, Singapore, 1984.
6. Clifford A. Shaffer, Data structures and Algorithm analysis in Java, Dover Publications,
2012, ISBN 97804864858127